README.md, before:

# cldr.js - Simple CLDR traverser

[CLDR (unicode.org)](http://cldr.unicode.org/) provides locale content for i18n software. The data is provided in two formats: LDML (XML format) and JSON. Our goal is to provide a simple layer to facilitate i18n software to access and use the [official CLDR JSON data](http://cldr.unicode.org/index/cldr-spec/json).

| File | Minified + gzipped size | Summary |
|---|--:|---|
| cldr.js | 2.1KB | Core library |
| cldr/event.js | +1.4KB | Provides methods to allow listening to events, eg. `get` |
| cldr/supplemental.js | +0.5KB | Provides supplemental helper methods |
| cldr/unresolved.js | +0.7KB | Provides inheritance support for unresolved data |

Quick jump:
- [About cldr.js?](#about-cldrjs)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Usage and installation](#usage-and-installation)
  - [How to get CLDR JSON data?](#how-to-get-cldr-json-data)
- [API](#api)
- [Error reference](#error)
- [Development / Contributing](#development--contributing)


## About cldr.js?

### Who uses cldr.js?

| Organization | Project |
|---|---|
| ![jQuery](doc/asset/jquery.png) | https://github.com/jquery/globalize |

### Where to use it?

It's designed to work both in the [browser](#usage-and-installation) and in [Node.js](#commonjs--nodejs). It supports [AMD](#usage-and-installation) and [CommonJs](#usage-and-installation);

See [Usage and installation](#usage-and-installation).

### What changed from 0.3.x to 0.4.x?

See our [changelogs](./CHANGELOG.md).

### Load only the CLDR portion you need

```javascript
// Load the appropriate portion of CLDR JSON data
Cldr.load(
  likelySubtagsData,
  enData,
  ptBrData
);
```

See [How to get CLDR JSON data?](#how-to-get-cldr-json-data) below for more information on how to get that data.

### Instantiate a locale and get it normalized

```javascript
var en = new Cldr( "en" );
en.attributes;
// > {
//   "bundle": "en",
//   "minLanguageId": "en",
//   "maxLanguageId": "en-Latn-US",
//   "language": "en",
//   "script": "Latn",
//   "territory": "US",
//   "region": "US"
// }

var zh = new Cldr( "zh-u-nu-finance-cu-cny" );
zh.attributes;
// > {
//   "bundle": "zh-Hant",
//   "minLanguageId": "zh",
//   "maxLanguageId": "zh-Hans-CN",
//   "language": "zh",
//   "script": "Hans",
//   "territory": "CN",
//   "region": "CN",
//   "u-nu": "finance",
//   "u-cu": "cny"
// }

```

- `language`, `script`, `territory` (also aliased as `region`), `maxLanguageId` (computed by [adding likely subtags](./src/core/likely_subtags.js)) and `minLanguageId` (computed by [removing likely subtags](./src/core/remove_likely_subtags.js)) according to the [specification](http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#Likely_Subtags).
- `bundle` holds the bundle lookup match based on the available loaded CLDR data, obtained by following [Bundle Lookup Matcher][].
- [Unicode locale extensions](http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#u_Extension).

Comparison between different locales.

| locale | minLanguageId | maxLanguageId | language | script | region |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **en** |  `"en"` |  `"en-Latn-US"`  |  `"en"` |  `"Latn"` |  `"US"` |
| **en-US** |  `"en"` |  `"en-Latn-US"`  |  `"en"` |  `"Latn"` |  `"US"` |
| **de** |  `"de"` |  `"de-Latn-DE"`  |  `"de"` |  `"Latn"` |  `"DE"` |
| **zh** |  `"zh"` |  `"zh-Hans-CN"`  |  `"zh"` |  `"Hans"` |  `"CN"` |
| **zh-TW** |  `"zh-TW"` |  `"zh-Hant-TW"`  |  `"zh"` |  `"Hant"` | `"TW"` |
| **ar** |  `"ar"` |  `"ar-Arab-EG"` |  `"ar"` |  `"Arab"` | `"EG"` |
| **pt** | `"pt"` | `"pt-Latn-BR"` | `"pt"` | `"Latn"` | `"BR"` |
| **pt-BR** | `"pt"` | `"pt-Latn-BR"` | `"pt"` | `"Latn"` | `"BR"` |
| **pt-PT** | `"pt-PT"` | `"pt-Latn-PT"` | `"pt"` | `"Latn"` | `"PT"` |
| **es** | `"es"` | `"es-Latn-ES"` | `"es"` | `"Latn"` | `"ES"` |
| **es-AR** | `"es-AR"` | `"es-Latn-AR"` | `"es"` | `"Latn"` | `"AR"` |

### Get item given its path

```javascript
// Equivalent to:
// .get( "main/{bundle}/numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
en.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > "."

// Equivalent to:
// .get( "main/{bundle}/numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
ptBr.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > ","
```

Have any [locale attributes](#cldrattributes) replaced with their corresponding values by embracing it with `{}`. In the example below, `{language}` is replaced with `"en"` and `{territory}` with `"US"`.

```javascript
// Notice the more complete way to get this data is:
// cldr.get( "supplemental/gender/personList/{language}" ) ||
// cldr.get( "supplemental/gender/personList/001" );
var enGender = en.get( "supplemental/gender/personList/{language}" );
// > "neutral"

var USCurrencies = en.get( "supplemental/currencyData/region/{territory}" );
// > [
//   { USD: { _from: "1792-01-01" } },
//   { USN: { _tender: "false" } },
//   { USS: { _tender: "false" } }
// ]

// Notice the more complete way to get this data is:
// cldr.get( "supplemental/measurementData/measurementSystem/{territory}" ) ||
// cldr.get( "supplemental/measurementData/measurementSystem/001" );
var enMeasurementSystem = en.get( "supplemental/measurementData/measurementSystem/{territory}" );
// > "US"
```

Get `undefined` for non-existent data.

```javascript
en.get( "/crazy/invalid/path" );
// ➡ undefined

// Avoid this
enData && enData.crazy && enData.crazy.invalid && enData.crazy.invalid.path;
```

### Resolve CLDR inheritances

If you are using unresolved JSON data, you can resolve them dynamically during runtime by loading the `cldr/unresolved.js` extension module. Currently, we support bundle inheritance.

```javascript
Cldr.load(
  unresolvedEnData
  unresolvedEnGbData,
  unresolvedEnInData,
  parentLocalesData, // supplemental
  likelySubtagsData  // supplemental
);

var enIn = new Cldr( "en-IN" );

// 1st time retrieved by resolving: en-IN ➡ en-GB (parent locale lookup).
// Further times retrieved straight from the resolved cache.
enIn.main( "dates/calendars/gregorian/dateTimeFormats/availableFormats/yMd" );
// > "dd/MM/y"

// 1st time retrieved by resolving: en-IN ➡ en-GB (parent locale lookup) ➡ en (truncate lookup)
// Further times retrieved straight from the resolved cache.
enIn.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > "."
```

### Helpers

We offer some convenient helpers.

```javascript
var usFirstDay = en.supplemental.weekData.firstDay();
// ➡ sun
// Equivalent to:
// en.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/{territory}" ) ||
// en.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/001" );

var brFirstDay = ptBr.supplemental.weekData.firstDay();
// ➡ mon
// Equivalent to:
// ptBr.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/{territory}" ) ||
// ptBr.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/001" );
```

### Browser support

We officially support:
- Firefox (latest - 2)+
- Chrome (latest - 2)+
- Safari 5.1+
- IE 8+
- Opera (latest - 2)+

Sniff tests show cldr.js also works on the following browsers:
- Firefox 4+
- Safari 5+
- Chrome 14+
- IE 6+
- Opera 11.1+

If you find any bugs, please just let us know. We'll be glad to fix them for the officially supported browsers, or at least update the documentation for the unsupported ones.


## Getting Started

### Usage and installation

cldr.js has no external dependencies. You can include it in the script tag of your page and you're ready to go. [Download it by clicking here](https://github.com/rxaviers/cldr/releases).

```html
<script src="cldr.js"></script>
```


```javascript
// Load the appropriate portion of CLDR JSON data.
// See "How to get CLDR JSON data?" below for more information on how to get that data.
Cldr.load( cldrJsonData );

// Instantiate it by passing a locale.
var ptBr = new Cldr( "pt-BR" );

// Get CLDR item data given its path.
// Equivalent to:
// .get( "main/{bundle}/numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
ptBr.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > ","
```

We are UMD wrapped. So, it supports AMD, CommonJS, or global variables (in case neither AMD nor CommonJS have been detected).

Example of usage on AMD:

```bash
bower install cldrjs
```

```javascript
require.config({
  paths: {
    "cldr": "bower_components/cldrjs/dist/cldr"
  }
});

require( [ "cldr", "cldr/supplemental", "cldr/unresolved" ], function( Cldr ) {
  ...
});
```

Example of usage with Node.js:

```bash
npm install cldrjs
```

```javascript
var Cldr = require( "cldrjs" );
```

### How to get CLDR JSON data?

The Unicode CLDR is available for download as JSON ([`json.zip`](http://www.unicode.org/Public/cldr/latest/json.zip)). This file contains the complete data of what the Unicode CLDR Project considers the top 20 languages (at the time of this writing).

You can generate the JSON representation of the languages not available in the ZIP file by using the official conversion tool ([`tools.zip`](http://www.unicode.org/Public/cldr/latest/)). This ZIP contains a README with instructions on how to build the data.

You can choose to generate unresolved data to save space or bandwidth (`-r false` option of the conversion tool) and instead have it resolve at runtime.

For the examples below, first fetch CLDR JSON data:

```bash
wget http://www.unicode.org/Public/cldr/latest/json.zip
unzip json.zip -d cldr
```

Example of embedding CLDR JSON data:  

```html
<script>
// Embedded (hard-coded) CLDR JSON data.
Cldr.load({
  supplemental: {
    likelySubtags: {
      ...
    }
  }
});
</script>
```

Example of loading it dynamically:

```html
<script src="jquery.js"></script>
<script>
$.get( "cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json", Cldr.load );
</script>
```

Example using AMD (also see our [functional tests](test/functional.js)):
```javascript
define([
  "cldr",
  "json!cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json"
], function( Cldr, likelySubtags ) {

  Cldr.load( likelySubtags );

});
```

Example using Node.js:

```javascript
var Cldr = require( "cldrjs" );
Cldr.load( require( "./cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json" ) );
```

#### Attention: library owners, do not embed data

It's NOT recommended that libraries embed data into their code logic for several reasons: avoid forcing a certain data version on users, avoid maintaining locale changes, avoid duplicating data among different i18n libraries.

We recommend loading CLDR data must be performed by end user code.

#### Which CLDR portion to load?

It depends on the used modules.

| File | Required CLDR JSON data |
|---|---|
| cldr.js | `cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json` |
| cldr/unresolved.js |  `cldr/supplemental/parentLocales.json` |
| cldr/supplemental.js | `cldr/supplemental/{timeData, weekData}.json` |

You must also load any portion of the CLDR data you plan to use in your library or your end-application.

## API

### Core

- **`Cldr.load( json, ... )`**

 Load resolved or unresolved [1] JSON data.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/load.md)

 1: Unresolved processing is **only available** after loading `cldr/unresolved.js` extension module.

- **`new Cldr( locale )`**

 Create a new instance of Cldr.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/constructor.md)

- **`.attributes`**

 Attributes is an Object created during instance initialization (construction) and are used internally by `.get()` to replace dynamic parts of an item path.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/attributes.md)

- **`.get( path )`**

 Get the item data given its path, or `undefined` if missing.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/get.md)

- **`.main( path )`**

 It's an alias for `.get([ "main/{bundle}", ... ])`.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/main.md)

### cldr/event.js

- **`Cldr.on( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event globally (for all instances).

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/global_on.md)

- **`Cldr.once( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event globally (for all instances). It will be automatically removed after it's first execution.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/global_once.md)

- **`Cldr.off( event, listener )`**

 Remove a listener function from the specified event globally (for all instances).

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/global_off.md)

- **`.on( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event for this instance.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/on.md)

- **`.once( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event for this instance. It will be automatically removed after it's first execution.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/once.md)

- **`.off( event, listener )`**

 Remove a listener function from the specified event for this instance.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/off.md)

#### Events

- `get` ➡ `( path, value )`

 Triggered before a `.get()` (or any alias) return. The triggered listener receives the normalized *path* and the *value* found.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/event_get.md)

### cldr/supplemental.js

- **`.supplemental( path )`**

 It's an alias for `.get([ "supplemental", ... ])`.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental.md)

- **`.supplemental.timeData.allowed()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental timeData allowed of locale's territory.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/time_data_allowed.md)

- **`.supplemental.timeData.preferred()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental timeData preferred of locale's territory.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/time_data_preferred.md)

- **`.supplemental.weekData.firstDay()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental weekData firstDay of locale's territory. 

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/week_data_first_day.md)

- **`.supplemental.weekData.minDays()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental weekData minDays of locale's territory as a Number.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/week_data_min_days.md)

### cldr/unresolved.js

- **`.get( path )`**

 Overload (extend) `.get()` to get the item data or lookup by following [locale inheritance](http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#Locale_Inheritance), set a local resolved cache if it's found (for subsequent faster access), or return `undefined`.

 [Read more...](doc/api/unresolved/get.md)

## Error reference

### CLDR Errors

#### `E_MISSING_BUNDLE`

Thrown when none of the loaded CLDR data can be used as a bundle for the corresponding locale. See more information on [Bundle Lookup Matcher][].

Error object:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| code | `E_MISSING_BUNDLE` |
| locale | Locale whose bundle could not be found |

### Parameter Errors

#### `E_MISSING_PARAMETER`

Thrown when a required parameter is missing on any static or instance methods.

Error object:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| code | `E_MISSING_PARAMETER` |
| name | Name of the missing parameter |

#### `E_INVALID_PAR_TYPE`

Thrown when a parameter has an invalid type on any static or instance methods.

Error object:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| code | `E_INVALID_PAR_TYPE` |
| name | Name of the invalid parameter |
| value | Invalid value |
| expected | Expected type |


### Development / Contributing

Install grunt and tests external dependencies. First, install the [grunt-cli](http://gruntjs.com/getting-started#installing-the-cli) and [bower](http://bower.io/) packages if you haven't before. These should be done as global installs. Then:

```bash
npm install && bower install
```
Run tests
```bash
grunt test
```
Build distribution file.
```bash
grunt
```

[Bundle Lookup Matcher]: ./doc/bundle_lookup_matcher.md

## License

MIT © [Rafael Xavier de Souza](http://rafael.xavier.blog.br)

Commit message:

New links for the cldr-data and unicode github
Contribution from Cade Roux <cade@roux.org> - @caderoux

README.md, after:

# cldr.js - Simple CLDR traverser

[CLDR (unicode.org)](http://cldr.unicode.org/) provides locale content for i18n software. The data is provided in two formats: LDML (XML format) and JSON. Our goal is to provide a simple layer to facilitate i18n software to access and use the [official CLDR JSON data](http://cldr.unicode.org/index/cldr-spec/json).

| File | Minified + gzipped size | Summary |
|---|--:|---|
| cldr.js | 2.1KB | Core library |
| cldr/event.js | +1.4KB | Provides methods to allow listening to events, eg. `get` |
| cldr/supplemental.js | +0.5KB | Provides supplemental helper methods |
| cldr/unresolved.js | +0.7KB | Provides inheritance support for unresolved data |

Quick jump:
- [About cldr.js?](#about-cldrjs)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Usage and installation](#usage-and-installation)
  - [How to get CLDR JSON data?](#how-to-get-cldr-json-data)
- [API](#api)
- [Error reference](#error)
- [Development / Contributing](#development--contributing)


## About cldr.js?

### Who uses cldr.js?

| Organization | Project |
|---|---|
| ![jQuery](doc/asset/jquery.png) | https://github.com/jquery/globalize |

### Where to use it?

It's designed to work both in the [browser](#usage-and-installation) and in [Node.js](#commonjs--nodejs). It supports [AMD](#usage-and-installation) and [CommonJs](#usage-and-installation);

See [Usage and installation](#usage-and-installation).

### What changed from 0.3.x to 0.4.x?

See our [changelogs](./CHANGELOG.md).

### Load only the CLDR portion you need

```javascript
// Load the appropriate portion of CLDR JSON data
Cldr.load(
  likelySubtagsData,
  enData,
  ptBrData
);
```

See [How to get CLDR JSON data?](#how-to-get-cldr-json-data) below for more information on how to get that data.

### Instantiate a locale and get it normalized

```javascript
var en = new Cldr( "en" );
en.attributes;
// > {
//   "bundle": "en",
//   "minLanguageId": "en",
//   "maxLanguageId": "en-Latn-US",
//   "language": "en",
//   "script": "Latn",
//   "territory": "US",
//   "region": "US"
// }

var zh = new Cldr( "zh-u-nu-finance-cu-cny" );
zh.attributes;
// > {
//   "bundle": "zh-Hant",
//   "minLanguageId": "zh",
//   "maxLanguageId": "zh-Hans-CN",
//   "language": "zh",
//   "script": "Hans",
//   "territory": "CN",
//   "region": "CN",
//   "u-nu": "finance",
//   "u-cu": "cny"
// }

```

- `language`, `script`, `territory` (also aliased as `region`), `maxLanguageId` (computed by [adding likely subtags](./src/core/likely_subtags.js)) and `minLanguageId` (computed by [removing likely subtags](./src/core/remove_likely_subtags.js)) according to the [specification](http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#Likely_Subtags).
- `bundle` holds the bundle lookup match based on the available loaded CLDR data, obtained by following [Bundle Lookup Matcher][].
- [Unicode locale extensions](http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#u_Extension).

Comparison between different locales.

| locale | minLanguageId | maxLanguageId | language | script | region |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **en** |  `"en"` |  `"en-Latn-US"`  |  `"en"` |  `"Latn"` |  `"US"` |
| **en-US** |  `"en"` |  `"en-Latn-US"`  |  `"en"` |  `"Latn"` |  `"US"` |
| **de** |  `"de"` |  `"de-Latn-DE"`  |  `"de"` |  `"Latn"` |  `"DE"` |
| **zh** |  `"zh"` |  `"zh-Hans-CN"`  |  `"zh"` |  `"Hans"` |  `"CN"` |
| **zh-TW** |  `"zh-TW"` |  `"zh-Hant-TW"`  |  `"zh"` |  `"Hant"` | `"TW"` |
| **ar** |  `"ar"` |  `"ar-Arab-EG"` |  `"ar"` |  `"Arab"` | `"EG"` |
| **pt** | `"pt"` | `"pt-Latn-BR"` | `"pt"` | `"Latn"` | `"BR"` |
| **pt-BR** | `"pt"` | `"pt-Latn-BR"` | `"pt"` | `"Latn"` | `"BR"` |
| **pt-PT** | `"pt-PT"` | `"pt-Latn-PT"` | `"pt"` | `"Latn"` | `"PT"` |
| **es** | `"es"` | `"es-Latn-ES"` | `"es"` | `"Latn"` | `"ES"` |
| **es-AR** | `"es-AR"` | `"es-Latn-AR"` | `"es"` | `"Latn"` | `"AR"` |

### Get item given its path

```javascript
// Equivalent to:
// .get( "main/{bundle}/numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
en.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > "."

// Equivalent to:
// .get( "main/{bundle}/numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
ptBr.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > ","
```

Have any [locale attributes](#cldrattributes) replaced with their corresponding values by embracing it with `{}`. In the example below, `{language}` is replaced with `"en"` and `{territory}` with `"US"`.

```javascript
// Notice the more complete way to get this data is:
// cldr.get( "supplemental/gender/personList/{language}" ) ||
// cldr.get( "supplemental/gender/personList/001" );
var enGender = en.get( "supplemental/gender/personList/{language}" );
// > "neutral"

var USCurrencies = en.get( "supplemental/currencyData/region/{territory}" );
// > [
//   { USD: { _from: "1792-01-01" } },
//   { USN: { _tender: "false" } },
//   { USS: { _tender: "false" } }
// ]

// Notice the more complete way to get this data is:
// cldr.get( "supplemental/measurementData/measurementSystem/{territory}" ) ||
// cldr.get( "supplemental/measurementData/measurementSystem/001" );
var enMeasurementSystem = en.get( "supplemental/measurementData/measurementSystem/{territory}" );
// > "US"
```

Get `undefined` for non-existent data.

```javascript
en.get( "/crazy/invalid/path" );
// ➡ undefined

// Avoid this
enData && enData.crazy && enData.crazy.invalid && enData.crazy.invalid.path;
```

### Resolve CLDR inheritances

If you are using unresolved JSON data, you can resolve them dynamically during runtime by loading the `cldr/unresolved.js` extension module. Currently, we support bundle inheritance.

```javascript
Cldr.load(
  unresolvedEnData
  unresolvedEnGbData,
  unresolvedEnInData,
  parentLocalesData, // supplemental
  likelySubtagsData  // supplemental
);

var enIn = new Cldr( "en-IN" );

// 1st time retrieved by resolving: en-IN ➡ en-GB (parent locale lookup).
// Further times retrieved straight from the resolved cache.
enIn.main( "dates/calendars/gregorian/dateTimeFormats/availableFormats/yMd" );
// > "dd/MM/y"

// 1st time retrieved by resolving: en-IN ➡ en-GB (parent locale lookup) ➡ en (truncate lookup)
// Further times retrieved straight from the resolved cache.
enIn.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > "."
```

### Helpers

We offer some convenient helpers.

```javascript
var usFirstDay = en.supplemental.weekData.firstDay();
// ➡ sun
// Equivalent to:
// en.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/{territory}" ) ||
// en.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/001" );

var brFirstDay = ptBr.supplemental.weekData.firstDay();
// ➡ mon
// Equivalent to:
// ptBr.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/{territory}" ) ||
// ptBr.get( "supplemental/weekData/firstDay/001" );
```

### Browser support

We officially support:
- Firefox (latest - 2)+
- Chrome (latest - 2)+
- Safari 5.1+
- IE 8+
- Opera (latest - 2)+

Sniff tests show cldr.js also works on the following browsers:
- Firefox 4+
- Safari 5+
- Chrome 14+
- IE 6+
- Opera 11.1+

If you find any bugs, please just let us know. We'll be glad to fix them for the officially supported browsers, or at least update the documentation for the unsupported ones.


## Getting Started

### Usage and installation

cldr.js has no external dependencies. You can include it in the script tag of your page and you're ready to go. [Download it by clicking here](https://github.com/rxaviers/cldr/releases).

```html
<script src="cldr.js"></script>
```


```javascript
// Load the appropriate portion of CLDR JSON data.
// See "How to get CLDR JSON data?" below for more information on how to get that data.
Cldr.load( cldrJsonData );

// Instantiate it by passing a locale.
var ptBr = new Cldr( "pt-BR" );

// Get CLDR item data given its path.
// Equivalent to:
// .get( "main/{bundle}/numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
ptBr.main( "numbers/symbols-numberSystem-latn/decimal" );
// > ","
```

We are UMD wrapped. So, it supports AMD, CommonJS, or global variables (in case neither AMD nor CommonJS have been detected).

Example of usage on AMD:

```bash
bower install cldrjs
```

```javascript
require.config({
  paths: {
    "cldr": "bower_components/cldrjs/dist/cldr"
  }
});

require( [ "cldr", "cldr/supplemental", "cldr/unresolved" ], function( Cldr ) {
  ...
});
```

Example of usage with Node.js:

```bash
npm install cldrjs
```

```javascript
var Cldr = require( "cldrjs" );
```

### How to get CLDR JSON data?

Unicode CLDR is available as JSON at https://github.com/unicode-cldr/ (after this [json-packaging proposal](http://cldr.unicode.org/development/development-process/design-proposals/json-packaging) took place) with the latest tools at http://www.unicode.org/Public/cldr/latest/.

`cldr-data` can be used for convenience. It always downloads from the correct source:

- https://github.com/rxaviers/cldr-data-npm
- https://github.com/rxaviers/cldr-data-bower

You can generate the JSON representation of the languages not available in the ZIP file by using the official conversion tool ([`tools.zip`](http://www.unicode.org/Public/cldr/latest/)). This ZIP contains a README with instructions on how to build the data.

You can choose to generate unresolved data to save space or bandwidth (`-r false` option of the conversion tool) and instead have it resolve at runtime.

For the examples below, first fetch CLDR JSON data:

```bash
wget http://www.unicode.org/Public/cldr/latest/json.zip
unzip json.zip -d cldr
```

Example of embedding CLDR JSON data:  

```html
<script>
// Embedded (hard-coded) CLDR JSON data.
Cldr.load({
  supplemental: {
    likelySubtags: {
      ...
    }
  }
});
</script>
```

Example of loading it dynamically:

```html
<script src="jquery.js"></script>
<script>
$.get( "cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json", Cldr.load );
</script>
```

Example using AMD (also see our [functional tests](test/functional.js)):
```javascript
define([
  "cldr",
  "json!cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json"
], function( Cldr, likelySubtags ) {

  Cldr.load( likelySubtags );

});
```

Example using Node.js:

```javascript
var Cldr = require( "cldrjs" );
Cldr.load( require( "./cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json" ) );
```

#### Attention: library owners, do not embed data

It's NOT recommended that libraries embed data into their code logic for several reasons: avoid forcing a certain data version on users, avoid maintaining locale changes, avoid duplicating data among different i18n libraries.

We recommend loading CLDR data must be performed by end user code.

#### Which CLDR portion to load?

It depends on the used modules.

| File | Required CLDR JSON data |
|---|---|
| cldr.js | `cldr/supplemental/likelySubtags.json` |
| cldr/unresolved.js |  `cldr/supplemental/parentLocales.json` |
| cldr/supplemental.js | `cldr/supplemental/{timeData, weekData}.json` |

You must also load any portion of the CLDR data you plan to use in your library or your end-application.

## API

### Core

- **`Cldr.load( json, ... )`**

 Load resolved or unresolved [1] JSON data.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/load.md)

 1: Unresolved processing is **only available** after loading `cldr/unresolved.js` extension module.

- **`new Cldr( locale )`**

 Create a new instance of Cldr.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/constructor.md)

- **`.attributes`**

 Attributes is an Object created during instance initialization (construction) and are used internally by `.get()` to replace dynamic parts of an item path.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/attributes.md)

- **`.get( path )`**

 Get the item data given its path, or `undefined` if missing.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/get.md)

- **`.main( path )`**

 It's an alias for `.get([ "main/{bundle}", ... ])`.

 [Read more...](doc/api/core/main.md)

### cldr/event.js

- **`Cldr.on( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event globally (for all instances).

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/global_on.md)

- **`Cldr.once( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event globally (for all instances). It will be automatically removed after it's first execution.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/global_once.md)

- **`Cldr.off( event, listener )`**

 Remove a listener function from the specified event globally (for all instances).

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/global_off.md)

- **`.on( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event for this instance.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/on.md)

- **`.once( event, listener )`**

 Add a listener function to the specified event for this instance. It will be automatically removed after it's first execution.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/once.md)

- **`.off( event, listener )`**

 Remove a listener function from the specified event for this instance.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/off.md)

#### Events

- `get` ➡ `( path, value )`

 Triggered before a `.get()` (or any alias) return. The triggered listener receives the normalized *path* and the *value* found.

 [Read more...](doc/api/event/event_get.md)

### cldr/supplemental.js

- **`.supplemental( path )`**

 It's an alias for `.get([ "supplemental", ... ])`.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental.md)

- **`.supplemental.timeData.allowed()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental timeData allowed of locale's territory.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/time_data_allowed.md)

- **`.supplemental.timeData.preferred()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental timeData preferred of locale's territory.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/time_data_preferred.md)

- **`.supplemental.weekData.firstDay()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental weekData firstDay of locale's territory. 

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/week_data_first_day.md)

- **`.supplemental.weekData.minDays()`**

 Helper function. Return the supplemental weekData minDays of locale's territory as a Number.

 [Read more...](doc/api/supplemental/week_data_min_days.md)

### cldr/unresolved.js

- **`.get( path )`**

 Overload (extend) `.get()` to get the item data or lookup by following [locale inheritance](http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#Locale_Inheritance), set a local resolved cache if it's found (for subsequent faster access), or return `undefined`.

 [Read more...](doc/api/unresolved/get.md)

## Error reference

### CLDR Errors

#### `E_MISSING_BUNDLE`

Thrown when none of the loaded CLDR data can be used as a bundle for the corresponding locale. See more information on [Bundle Lookup Matcher][].

Error object:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| code | `E_MISSING_BUNDLE` |
| locale | Locale whose bundle could not be found |

### Parameter Errors

#### `E_MISSING_PARAMETER`

Thrown when a required parameter is missing on any static or instance methods.

Error object:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| code | `E_MISSING_PARAMETER` |
| name | Name of the missing parameter |

#### `E_INVALID_PAR_TYPE`

Thrown when a parameter has an invalid type on any static or instance methods.

Error object:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| code | `E_INVALID_PAR_TYPE` |
| name | Name of the invalid parameter |
| value | Invalid value |
| expected | Expected type |


### Development / Contributing

Install grunt and tests external dependencies. First, install the [grunt-cli](http://gruntjs.com/getting-started#installing-the-cli) and [bower](http://bower.io/) packages if you haven't before. These should be done as global installs. Then:

```bash
npm install && bower install
```
Run tests
```bash
grunt test
```
Build distribution file.
```bash
grunt
```

[Bundle Lookup Matcher]: ./doc/bundle_lookup_matcher.md

## License

MIT © [Rafael Xavier de Souza](http://rafael.xavier.blog.br)
